# 2022HonorsThesis_Indels

Project abstract: The processes occurring during meiotic recombination, from the initiation of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) to the completion of crossing-over (CO) formation, have numerous opportunities for inaccuracy. In particular, several types of missteps during recombination, including the formation of double DSBs, could lead to genome deletions. To explore this phenomenon in maize, we examined the occurrence of indels at recombination sites. To do it, we mapped indels to meiotic DSB hotspots and CO sites and measured the presence and degree of enrichment of indels of different sizes. We assessed the indel generation potential of meiotic recombination by calculating three measures: indel overlap by recombination sites, recombination site overlap by indels, and indel density at recombination sites. We found substantial enrichment of small indels (1-50 bp) at CO sites, providing the first strong evidence of mutagenicity of meiotic recombination in plants. Small indel density decreased in regions 2 kb upstream and downstream from the recombination sites, implying that the indels were generated in a localized fashion. Indels have the potential to alter gene function and plant phenotype, marking their importance as a source of genetic diversity. Thus. understanding mechanisms of indel origination and their relationship to the recombination mechanism is important for efforts that exploit genetic diversity for crop improvement.

Each file is named by the type of analysis completed: for example, in the script "empCO_maize_smallIndel.R", small indel density and the other two measures within empirical crossovers were calculated


